This work is part of a broader interest in exploring how cultural objects algorithmically represent social realities and the ideological content present in those representations. In this sense, it aligns with the perspective of games as systemic cultural artifacts (Stenros, 2017, p. 504). I will now explain the implications of considering games as systems in relation to their expression and how a critical reading of this expression is possible.
## 2.1.1. Games as Systems
In this thesis, I approach games as closed formal systems that subjectively represent subsets of reality, engage players in structured conflict, and resolve their uncertainty in an unequal outcome. This definition synthesizes the one presented by Crawford (1997, pp. 8–9): "a game is a closed formal system that subjectively represents a subset of reality" with Fullerton's (2008, p. 43): "a game is a closed, formal system that engages players in structured conflict and resolves its uncertainty in an unequal outcome." Next, I break down this definition and briefly discuss its components and implications.

The first part of the definition refers to the game as a closed formal system; namely, that each game is a "complex whole" (Oxford University Press, n.d.) that is bounded and structured by its rules and procedures (Fullerton, 2008, p. 42). The main implication of this conception is that it enables the study of the game as an object in itself, distinguishable from other games as well as from things that exist and happen beyond the game.

The second part of the definition refers to what the game can represent. At this point, it is important to clarify how I use the concepts of model and simulation in this thesis. Bogost has defined simulation as "a representation of a source system through a less complex system that informs the user’s understanding of the source system in a subjective manner" (2006, p. 107). In this thesis, I use that definition to refer to the game model and simulation as the execution of said model. Additionally, the definition recognizes that these models are subjective abstractions of reality. It is assumed that reality can be represented through the game systems, but it is also acknowledged that this representation is the product of a subject and, therefore, an interpretation (Iglesia, 2023). In this way, every game contains a model of reality (MODEL 1), which is an algorithmic representation of the mental model that its creator has about society (MODEL 2), which is enacted during the simulation.

The third part refers to the conflict between the players or game agents and the system. For Fullerton, the game system is constructed from a perspective of structured conflict, which does not imply the simulation of violence, but rather a tension between the system, the agents interacting with the system, and their objectives. This, in turn, implies that the entities and behaviors that enable tension have been previously structured by the designers, most likely in an intentional way.

Finally, the last part of the definition refers to the inherent uncertainty of the game space that the system enables and to the resolution of that uncertainty. Fullerton complements the idea of conflict with that of uncertainty, completing the outline of the complex and emergent nature of game systems. At the same time, this definition acknowledges the possibility of measuring, experiencing, expressing—and therefore interpreting—the game's outcome in different ways.
## 2.1.2. Procedural expression
Unlike what happens with narrative artifacts like literature or cinema, board games are systemic artifacts expressed through structured behaviors (procedures) that respond to the non-trivial actions of players (Aarseth, 1995). When a player interacts with the game, it processes the player’s action, changing the state of its entities and systems according to the rules. Then, following the guidelines established by its designer, the game provides feedback to the player through texts (visual, auditory, haptic) that inform their experience. According to this framework, players are able to understand how their actions influence the system’s behavior and receive information that grants value to this behavior. Consider an abstract game of chance where players roll a die. If they get a number less than 3, they win; otherwise, they lose.

``It's your turn.``
``You have rolled the die.``
``You  rolled a 6.``
``You lost the game.``

These simple rules enable an extremely boring game, yet one that fulfills the objective of expressing itself through its state changes and providing textual information to the player that explains this state change and its consequences for the game.

I have briefly explained how board games express themselves through behavior, but this does not fully explain how players create meaning. Moreover, my hypothetical example does not do justice to the complexity of games that model social and historical systems. Frasca (2001, p. 27) and Bogost (2006, p. 132) have pointed out the role of players’ interpretation of simulations as a fundamental element in understanding players' _meaning-making_ processes. Bogost has observed that while playing, players interact with these models of reality and interpret them using their own mental models of reality as a reference. For example, if the game is about managing a country, it is expected that a lack of resources will lead to public discontent, which in turn affects the game’s progress. When there are acute differences between the player's mental models and the game model, it is possible for what Bogost has defined as _simulation fever_ to occur in the interaction:

>The residue of this interaction infects both spheres, causing what I earlier called simulation fever, the nervous discomfort caused by the interaction of the game’s unitoperational representations of a segment of the real world and the player’s subjective understanding of that representation (Bogost, 2006, p. 136).

In this sense, we understand procedural expression as a type of communication that emerges in games through the systems and rules that define how the game should behave in response to player actions. Instead of conveying messages in a direct or narrative manner, procedural expression manifests in the effects these actions produce within the game’s system and in how players interpret these effects. This allows the game to represent complex dynamics and simulate social or historical realities, where players not only interact but also interpret and imbue the experience with meaning through their own perspectives and mental models of the world.
## 2.1.3. Polyphony and Ideological Tensions
Cultural objects are materialized expressions of the ideas, values, and projects—namely, the ideologies—that coexist in tension within a society (McDonnell, 2023). The critical study of these objects allows us to better understand people and their cultural practices. Each object created, whether to solve a problem or simply as a form of expression, tells part of the story of how a society's ideas, values, and projects struggle for legitimacy. As a result of these conflicts, certain ideas fall out of use, values are reconstructed, projects conclude, and objects transform.

These ideological tensions in culture and its objects have been explained as the dynamic between dominant, subaltern, and emergent elements (Williams, 1978). The dominant or hegemonic elements of culture are those that are normalized; the subaltern elements correspond to forms that are marginalized or assimilated by the dominant culture; and the emergent or counterhegemonic elements are new components that challenge the established dominant elements.

This discursive tension inherent in material culture implies the existence of voices that articulate, express, and discuss these dominant, subaltern, and emergent elements. For domination to exist, there must be those who are dominated, and for there to be a dominant truth, there must be explicit or implicit subaltern truths that support it. The concept of _polyphony_ introduced by Bakhtin recognizes the ability of texts to house multiple voices that articulate dynamic and heterogeneous forms of expression within a single text:

>The concept of “polyphony” calls attention to the coexistence, in any textual or extratextual situation, of a plurality of voices that do not fuse into a single consciousness but exist on different registers, generating dialogical dynamism among themselves. Both heteroglossia and polyphony point not to mere heterogeneity as such but rather to the dialogical angle at which voices are juxtaposed and counterposed so as to generate something beyond themselves. (Stam, 1989, p. 229).

This polyphonic condition of cultural objects—and particularly of games—enables multiple readings of the same object, focusing on specific voices that do not necessarily resonate with the object’s dominant text. As outlined above, cultural objects can be considered forms of expression of a society's ideological tensions and of the multiple voices that manifest around these tensions. In this sense, a critical reading of these objects must go beyond inspecting and questioning their dominant texts; it must also involve those embedded voices that occupy a subaltern plane but are intrinsically connected to the dominant. 

Board games, as cultural objects that systemically represent social realities, are polyphonic artifacts that express the ideological tensions of their contexts. Like other cultural artifacts, these tensions can be analyzed in terms of their dominant, subaltern, and emergent elements (Williams, 1978). In the case of board games, the dominant elements and the discourses [1] they articulate align with the vision of their designers and are inferred from the relationship between the game’s rules and mechanics, the storyline, events, characters, and the feedback presented to players (Booth, 2020). This causes gameplay experiences to generally unfold according to the terms proposed by the designers, relegating certain elements to the residual plane, which often operate below the players' detection threshold. As I explain in section 2.3, critical work with board games must not only examine and expose the ideological tensions and relations of domination and subordination present in their texts, but also resist and subvert the hegemony and authority of these texts by recovering and amplifying their subaltern voices in the form of counterhegemonic texts (Bhandari, 2022).

[1] Booth has referred to these discourses as the "ludic discourses" of play. In this thesis, when referring to dominant discourses, I also allude to this concept introduced by Booth.