In this section, I present four approaches to critical work with board games. First, I refer to ludology, or the formal study of games. I present the rationale behind this approach and explain its benefits for the critical study of games. Second, I introduce board game subversion as a critical practice of resistance through art and design. Finally, I present two experimental approaches: Object-oriented inquiry and reflective digitization, which advance the critical analysis and design of board games.
## 2.3.1. Ludology and Procedurality
Ludology has been defined as the formal study of the structure and elements of games (Frasca, 2013). This field approaches "games as games," differentiating their elements (Fernández-Vara, 2019; Fullerton, 2008; Järvinen, 2008; Juul, 2001; Stenros & Montola, 2024), their functioning (Aarseth, 1995), and their expressive procedures (Bogost, 2006; Bogost, 2007; Frasca, 2009) from those of other media forms.

Frasca has proposed organizing these formal elements into three schemas to facilitate analysis: the representational schema, the simulation schema, and the performance schema. The representational schema constitutes the fictional layer of the game, manifested through its story as well as the audiovisual representations of its components. The simulation schema, on the other hand, consists of constitutive rules (Stenros, 2024, p. 29) and the ways of interacting with these rules, or mechanics, that is, the algorithmic structure that enables the game’s functioning. Finally, the performance schema refers to the actions players take to participate in the game.

Within the field of ludology, there is the procedural school, which places central importance on the simulation layer as the enabler of gameplay and a fundamental piece in the meaning-making process. Works from a critical procedural perspective focus on how the game's rules and procedures operate to circulate ideas, values, and projects about the world (Fernández-Vara, 2019, pp. 149–150). For this work, I approach ludology as the formal study of games that inspects their rhetorical operations, focusing on their algorithmic structure, complemented by the analysis of their representations and performance (Ambrosio, Ross; 2023).
## 2.3.2. Subversion
Critical work with board games is not limited to analyzing their meaning-making processes; it also involves the act of appropriating and transforming these games and their cultures [3] to promote the reconfiguration of political realities and power structures.

Subversion as a cultural practice is the strategic use of creative methods to challenge, dismantle, or reinterpret established social, political, or cultural norms, revealing and contesting underlying power structures or dominant ideologies. Previously, Debord and Wolman used the French term *détournement* [4] to refer to the critical practice of diverting or subverting existing cultural objects to reconfigure their original meaning, thereby questioning or challenging dominant ideologies. 

Regarding games, Flanagan has referred to subversion as a form of critical intervention that recognizes games as polyphonic artifacts and acts upon them to amplify the subaltern voices embedded within them:

>A subversion is an action, plan, or activity intended to undermine an institution, event, or object. When discussing subversion, it is necessary to know what system or phenomenon in particular one is working against, be it political, social, legal, or cultural. (...) Subversion has been identified by several theorists and practitioners as a powerful means for marginalized groups to have a voice. (Flanagan, 2009, p. 10-11. )

Flanagan envisions a scenario in which, through play, people navigate and reveal their subaltern voices—the hidden transcripts of the social—and in which designers are informed by players on how to enable play spaces that allow for the emergence of new discourses integrating these postponed voices:

>James C. Scott writes about subjugated persons and how the subjugated public resists power. He examines the spaces where those dominated can express their “hidden transcript,” or offset narrative, one that serves to critique those in power. It is easy to see that games provide one such outlet. An effort to reveal or make visible these “hidden transcripts” that often lie among the “offi cial transcripts” of power relations parallels the investigations of many players and artists in a variety of milieus. Is this not the essence of unplaying? (...) The hidden transcript played by those who are far from empowered can perhaps communicate to game designers important strategies through which games can expose, validate, or celebrate these equally valid modes of discourse. In turn, players may use this information and their experiences to alter the social institutions we live by. Using the critical play method, the role of the designer can widen to include an analytical framework for comprehension or analysis, characterized by a careful examination of social, cultural, political, or even personal themes that function as alternates to popular play spaces. (Flanagan, 2009, p. 261)

Subversion as a practice of resistance through creation has a strong relationship with the postcolonial. Cultural artifacts (goods and services) circulating in postcolonial societies are often infused with ideas and values that resonate with the ideological projects of centers of power. For subaltern subjects, the relationship with dominant culture and its artifacts inherently involves processes of assimilation and resistance (Bhandari, 2022), which are expressed in material culture (Williams, 1978). The subversion of digital games is a design practice widely spread within play and game-making cultures in postcolonial societies, whether as a way to make visible (Loban & Apperley, 2019), expose (Mir & Owens, 2013), think counterfactually (Apperley, 2013 & Mukherjee, 2017), or openly contest (Lakomy, 2019) Empire.    

In the case of board games, one path for this cultural transformation is the critical intervention of popular games, aiming to reconfigure the tensions and voices that emerge during play. By recognizing games as cultural artifacts that embed ideological tensions, expressed through multiple voices, it becomes possible to subvert these elements to facilitate the emergence of new narratives.

In this thesis, I frame critical work with games in terms of subversion; that is, an intervention that facilitates the emergence of subaltern and postponed voices, which question and contest the dominant narratives of games and their cultures. In my case, I am particularly interested in working with the game’s algorithmic structure and leveraging its inherent plurality of voices to enable new narratives that challenge what is established by the game's dominant texts.
## 2.3.3. Experimental Approaches
I present below two practices that advance the procedural study of board games and their subversion.
### Object-oriented inquiry
In _A Day in the Life of a Tree_, Wilson y Rieley (1971) explore the suffering of a tree:

>Feel the wind burn through my skin 
>The pain, the air is killing me
>For years my limbs stretched to the sky 
>A nest for birds to sit and sing
>But now my branches suffer
>And my leaves don't bear the glow
>They did so long ago
>One day I was full of life
>My sap was rich and I was strong
>From seed to tree I grew so tall
>Through wind and rain I could not fall
>But now my branches suffer
>And my leaves don't offer
>Poetry to men of song
>_(Wilson & Rieley, 1971)_

To achieve this, Wilson and Rieley speculate about the experiences and emotions of an aged and damaged tree. This speculative approach is a common resource in musical works, but it has recently been consolidated to broaden our perspective on the world and its objects.

*Object-oriented Inquiry* (OOI) is a speculative methodology for game research focused on their components. This methodology is rooted in the philosophical tradition known as speculative realism (Harman, 2015) and has been adapted to critical game studies by Bogost (2006). Recently, Spiel and Nacke (2020) have explored the potential of OOI as a means to innovate research on the relationship between people and technologies, especially games, by shifting the focus away from the subjective experience of players and onto the game's components. In this regard, these authors have introduced narrative inquiry as a form of OOI that allows generating research data from the perspective of objects:

>Several approaches allow researchers to generate narratives from an object’s perspective. For example, technology can be anthropomorphisized to discuss the different roles it takes up in relation to humans and other objects. Narrative inquiries can also rely on multiple human perspectives, be it through co-speculation on a thing with distinct groups, interviews with actors who enact being a thing from previously collected data or entire speculative enactments from an object’s perspective. (Spiel & Nacke, 2020, p. 4)

I consider that narrative inquiry enables forms of analytical and critical work with subaltern voices present in games. First, OOI allows us to question game objects about the events and behaviors within the game. Then, it enables us to reconstruct these objects’ perspectives, providing us with an understanding of their experience in the game world and their relationship with other objects and the player. Finally, narrative inquiry allows us to use this information to speculatively reconstruct their perspectives. For example, from this perspective, we could use information about a game NPC to speculate about its experience in the game world and even create texts that narrate, from the NPC's perspective, how the game’s events have unfolded.
### Reflexive Digitization
Reflexive digitization is an experimental practice in board game research and design that uses digitization to examine, reveal, and question the algorithmic structure of these games. By reconstructing a board game in a digital format, the practitioner gains a deep understanding of the original material and develops tools that facilitate future interventions in the game.

This practice is being studied at the Game Research Lab of Tampere University under the supervision of Thomas Apperley. For clarity and to aid in the reading of this thesis, I include a description of the foundations and procedures of this practice in the Appendix.