## 4.2.1. Historical background of *Juden Raus!*
Explaining the origin and spread of antisemitic ideas in Nazi Germany goes far beyond the scope of this thesis. However, to address this case, I find it essential to briefly reflect on the use of games during the Third Reich to build and establish supremacist ideas.

Material culture played a fundamental role in spreading racist and supremacist ideas in Germany, legitimizing policies of marginalization and extermination of its population. The Reich Ministry for Public Enlightenment and Propaganda, known by its German initials as the RMVP, orchestrated a cultural policy with concrete actions aimed at spreading hate narratives and justifying the exercise of state violence against marginalized populations—including Jews (Petropoulos, 1999; The Wiener Holocaust Library, n.d.-c, 2019). Within these actions, the Nazi party gathered thinkers, artists, and creators aligned with the regime's ideas, who worked in coordination to expand the communicative reach of the regime. The propaganda apparatus of the Third Reich not only exploited the media resources at its disposal but also advanced their use for propagandistic purposes. Notable examples include Leni Riefenstahl's influential film work and Goebbels' extensive propagandistic repertoire.

During the Third Reich, games were also promoted as a medium. Large-scale events like the 1936 Berlin Olympics were organized to present Nazi Germany as a strong and unified nation while masking the regime's attacks on the civilian population [1].

Nazism was in tune with the civilizing vision of sports that circulated throughout the Western world at the time (Muñoz, 1997). In the years leading up to World War II, organizations aligned with the party promoted ideas associating physical discipline and sports with racial purity:

>SS Chief Group Leader Jeckeln attacked the “Blond craze” at a meeting of the NSDAP. Blond hair and blue eyes by themselves, he said, were not convincing proof that one belongs to the Nordic race. A girl who wants to marry an SS man today must be above reproach in every respect. Therefore she is required to possess the Reich sports medal. Many people, perhaps even today, could not understand the reason for this requirement. Germany does not need women who can dance beautifully at five o’clock teas, but women who have given proof of their health through accomplishments in the field of sport. “The javelin and the springboard are more useful than lipstick in promoting health.” (Mosse, 1966, p. 43).

Similarly, demonstrating excellence in sports disciplines endorsed by the Reich was a requirement for entering a military career:

>As an SS candidate, during his first year of service he must earn the military sports insignia and the bronze Reich sports insignia. There-upon, at the age of nineteen or nineteen and a half (...) he enters the Labor Service and, following that, the army.

There is evidence of supremacist and racist ideas circulating in games and toys manufactured during the Third Reich, and academic works have been produced that provide detailed descriptions of each of these artifacts (Milton, 2024; Postert, 2018). However, there is still limited English-language literature analyzing the ideation and creation contexts of these artifacts. On this topic, Lisa Pine recently discussed how game creation was cultivated within Nazi-affiliated women's organizations: 

>In order to reach every German housewife, the Nazi organisations embraced a variety of vehicles and techniques. Propaganda and housekeeping tips supporting the Four Year Plan were featured in the Women’s Bureau’s own house organ the Deutsche Hauswirtschaft and in the NS Frauenwarte. (...) Nazi women’s groups produced staggering numbers of flyers and other publications. (...) The Women’s Bureau even produced a board game for girls as part of this campaign, Wettlauf mit dem Verderb (compete against waste) (Pine, 2016, p. 26).  

*Juden Raus!* is an interesting case because it was not produced by the Nazi party but by a group of independent inventors. While the game circulates the racist ideas championed by the Nazi party, the fact that it was produced by civilians indicates the reach of these ideas within the civilian population, and, above all, how the Nazi propaganda apparatus impacted pastimes and design traditions, transforming them into vehicles for ideological circulation (Postert, 2021).
## 4.2.2. *Juden Raus!* overview
*Juden Raus!* is a family board game published in Dresden, Germany, in 1938. The authorship of this game has not been established, but its patent is registered under the company Günther & Co. Additionally, its distribution was managed by Rudolf Fabricius's firm (Morris-Friedman & Schädler, 2003, p. 48).
### Theme of the game
The game models the process of Aryanization in the Third Reich in the years leading up to World War II.
### Objective of the game
The game is played in groups of 2 to 6 players. The players take on the role of German police officers with the goal of capturing and expelling Jewish people (represented as hats) before their rivals.
### Game Components 
The basic components of the game are the board, player tokens – police officers (6), hat tokens – Jewish people (36), the die, and instruction cards. The board represents a German city surrounded by a wall and is divided into 6 lanes, one for each player. These lanes are further divided into spaces, which are occupied by police officers and hats. There are four types of spaces: concentration point spaces, transit spaces, Jewish business spaces, and the city center space. The city center is equidistant from all players and is the only meeting point for their avatars. Each lane has 3 Jewish business spaces, totaling 18. These are the only structures clearly described in the game. The businesses belong to the following Jewish families: Hirschfeld, David, Jacob, Levin, Goldmann, Gorstein, Stern, Cohn, Salomon, Hirson, Rosenbaüm, Herz, and Lowenstein.
### Gameplay 
At the start of their turn, players roll the die to calculate their token's movement on the board. Initially, players move towards the city center. Once they reach the center, they move in the opposite direction, back towards the concentration point of their lane, and so on. Players cannot voluntarily change their token’s direction and depend on the die roll to move. As players transit their lanes, they may land on one of the 3 Jewish family businesses in each lane. Upon doing so, they capture a hat and place it on top of their police token. Hat capture is not optional. If, upon reaching the city center lane, the player encounters another player with captured hats, they steal them. This action is also mandatory. Upon landing on their lane's concentration point, the player deposits the captured hats and changes direction to return to the city center. The first player to transfer 6 hats from the city to concentration zones wins the game.
### Status cultural
Due to its racist and supremacist rhetoric targeting Jewish people, *Juden Raus!* has been labeled "the most infamous game in history." It is not currently distributed commercially, and the only available physical copies are held at the Wiener Library of Tel Aviv University, Israel and the Museum of Jewish Heritage in New York City, USA (Morris-Friedman & Schädler, 2003, p. 47 & The Wiener Holocaust Library, n.d.-a).

The commercial and cultural impact of this game on German society in 1938 cannot be estimated. Morris-Friedman and Schädler note that there is no evidence suggesting the game had a significant impact on the German public. On the contrary, the authors present two items that suggest the game may have had low demand and lacked support from Nazi media.

The game’s impact on contemporary society has not been academically studied. Online, there are accounts from individuals who have reconstructed *Juden Raus!* in physical and digital formats and played it out of academic curiosity or morbid interest. In the editorial "To Replicate or Not to Replicate? Our Question (and Reflections)," Christine Schmidt, Deputy Director and Head of Research at The Wiener Holocaust Library, comments on the game’s status in the museum's collection:

>Although perhaps its significance at the time was minimal, it is clear that for the Library and its visitors, as well as other museum and heritage institutions, the game carries import. It’s probably a stretch to claim that, in the words of Oren Stier, it has reached ‘iconic’ status, but perhaps amongst our own collections it has. For example, in moving to our current premises at Russell Square in 2011, a special, moveable display case was created expressly for the game. (...)
>
>In some ways, the game has become synonymous with the Library and its foundational collections: the Library was built on examples of Nazi propaganda and antisemitic tracts collected by Alfred Wiener and his colleagues as they were being disseminated and to serve as a warning. _Juden Raus!_ is not the only racist game, nor is it the only game we have in our collections, but when we refer to ‘The Game’ among the staff, we know which one we mean. (The Wiener Holocaust Library, n.d.-b) 

Beyond these references, in my exploratory review, I could not find evidence suggesting that *Juden Raus!* was a cult game during the Third Reich or that it holds such status today.
## 4.2.3. Critical work conducted on *Juden Raus!*
### Game analysis
During the literature review for this thesis, I found two academic articles analyzing Juden Raus!. Below, I provide a brief overview of these articles, noting their main observations regarding the game’s ideological content.

Morris-Friedman and Schädler (2003) analyze *Juden Raus!* from a historical perspective, explaining its characteristics as well as its production and consumption context. The authors explain that *Juden Raus!* is a modified version of another German game, *Fang den Hut* (1927):

>“Jews Out!” is a modified race game with two versions of the rules given. The first version is a simple game of chance with no interaction between the players. The second version adds a little more strategy to the game and is similar in feeling to “Parchisi” or “The Hyena Game” (Bell 1979). The main source for the game was certainly “Fang den Hut” (English title “Trap the Cap”), a game published by Otto Maier Verlag, Ravensburg, as early as 1927 and still distributed today in various countries. (p. 52)

However, they observe that *Juden Raus!* differs from other games with similar mechanics because it has a "theme of racial hatred," which is expressed through its objectives and its racist representations of Jewish people:

>“Juden Raus!” is a race game that instills values of a totalitarian fascist regime. It has both the theme of racial hatred and employs racist images in the game design. The object of the game is to deprive the German Jews of their property and to make them leave the city. The game board clearly states that the first player to remove six Jews from the city wins the game. In this way the game clearly foreshadows the policy of racial genocide that was to follow. (p.48)

The authors reflect on how these racist objectives and representations transform a game that would otherwise be "harmless" into an artifact of hate:

>(…) the hats especially designed for the capturing method of Fang den Hut, are also used to depict the captured Jews. This clearly demonstrates that it was this harmless and successful board game that inspired the anonymous author of “Juden Raus!”. (p. 53)

More recently, Seriff (2017) examined *Juden Raus!* by focusing on the game's rules and the dynamics they enable, comparing them to extermination practices:

>The Juden Raus! game similarly presaged a very real practice known as Judenjagd (hunt the Jew), which involved searches for Jews who had survived ghetto liquidations and deportations to death camps in Poland in 1942 and had attempted to hide ‘on the Aryan side.’ The ultimate goal of such ‘hunts’ was the brutal evacuation and extinction of the hunted and discovered Jews in the Nazi death camps... The rules of play also mirror longstanding political and ideological practices of isolating, exiling, or extinguishing Jews from as far back as the Christian Inquisition. (p. 161)

These articles provide limited information about the gameplay experience of *Juden Raus!* Morris-Friedman and Schädler acknowledge having played the game but offer few insights into their experience as players. For his part, Seriff does not clarify whether his analysis of *Juden Raus!* is based on his own gameplay experience or a textual interpretation of the rules.

Another important aspect of these analyses is the omission of details about the game reconstruction process. Morris-Friedman and Schädler admit to having adapted the game based on the available rules to analyze it; however, they do not detail how this process was conducted or what gameplay insights emerged from it.

Finally, both works agree that *Juden Raus!* is an antisemitic propaganda artifact that reflected and circulated the dominant discourses of its production and use context. Using this game as a point of reference, Seriff reflects on popular culture items:

>(...) not only reflect a society’s dominant values and positions about a hated or feared ‘other,’ but work subliminally to both create and maintain them in the national public imaginary (...) Games—or high art parading as games— must be seen in this construction not only as a reflection of a country’s dominant acts and ideologies, for example, but as active components in the constitution, reinforcement and entrenchment of those ideologies.
### Game interventions
The only digital version of *Juden Raus!* I found during my ludographic review is the one created by users *HalloikbenJim* and *Lejon* for the Tabletop Simulator (Berserk Games, 2015) engine. This version is available for free on the user-generated content distribution platform, Steam Workshop. *HalloikbenJim* explains the reason behind this digitization project as follows:

> The digitalisation and upload of this game is purely for historical and educational reasons. I personally condemn anti-Semitic and Nazi ideologies, and for these reasons I think it is important not forget history, so it won’t happen again. By playing through this game, known as “history’s most infamous board game.”, you will experience how toxic ideologies indoctrinate otherwise normal families by placing offensive stereotypes in a “fun” context and by normalizing the exclusion of minorities from society.

To create this version of the game, the creators reconstructed its rules and components using the article by Morris-Friedman and Schädler, reviewed in the previous section, as their primary reference. 

The authors replicated the original board and tokens as three-dimensional models manipulated during gameplay. As in the original version, these pieces contain racist representations of Jewish people, which may be disturbing to players. In this version, the correct functioning of the game’s algorithmic structure relies entirely on the players. The game rules have not been automated, so players must know and enforce them, as in the original version.

At the time of developing this thesis project, I found no other references to critical exercises conducted with *Juden Raus!*.
## 4.2.4. Reasons to subvert *Juden Raus!*
*Juden Raus!* is one of the most problematic board games in existence. It generates such aversion in Western culture that even its reproduction for museum purposes is debated (The Wiener Holocaust Library, n.d.-d). Is it worthwhile to reconstruct this object? After all, at this point in history, what new insights can an antisemitic propaganda artifact from World War II offer us? In my view, the critical work on this game remains incomplete. Analysts have done well to expose the hegemonic narratives of violence that *Juden Raus!* articulates, but little has been done to subvert them. There is still a need to expose the subaltern narratives embedded in the game and examine their potential to challenge the hegemonic narratives it produces.

What if we transform this violent artifact into a mnemotechnic resource that generates critical awareness about state violence against its citizens? The counterforensic exercise with *Juden Raus!* seeks to demonstrate that it is possible to use a board game’s algorithmic structure to question its own rhetorical operations. More specifically, this exercise aims to show that it is feasible to employ residual elements of the game system to reconstruct the perspective of those who are victimized during a simulation. I argue that counterforensic ludology allows for the articulation and presentation of these subaltern narratives, as well as enabling forms of critical play through an artifact based on the same algorithmic structure. In this way, the game’s original propagandistic purpose is subverted, granting it value as a mnemotechnic resource.